.TH GPINYIN @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
gpinyin \- Chinese European-like writing within groff
.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\" The .SH was moved to this place in order to appease `apropos'.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Legalese
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.de co
Copyright \(co 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

This file is part of gpinyin, which is part of groff, a free software
project.

You can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU
General Public License version 2 as published by the Free Software
Foundation.

The license text is available in the internet at
.UR http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html
.UE .
..
.
.de au
This file was written by Bernd Warken <groff-bernd.warken-72@web.de>.
..
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Characters
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.ie t .ds EL \f[S]\N'188'\f[P]\"
.el .ds EL \&.\|.\|.\&\"
.\" ie t .char \[Ellipsis] \f[S]\N'188'\f[P]
.\" el .char \[Ellipsis] \&.\|.\|.\&\
.\" called with \[Ellipsis]
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.SY gpinyin
.OP \-
.OP \-\-
.OP \& "\%filespec \*(EL"
.YS
.
.BR "gpinyin -h" | --help
.br
.BR "gpinyin -v" | --version
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
This is a preprocesor for
.BR \%groff (@MAN1EXT@).
.
It allows to add the Chinese European-like language
.I Pinyin
into
.BR groff (7)
files.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "OPTIONS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "Breaking Options"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
An option is
.IR breaking ,
when the program just writes the information that was asked for and
then stops.
.
All other arguments will be ignored by that.
.
The
.I breaking
options are here
.
.TP
.B -h\~\fR|\fB\~--help
Print help information with a short explanation of options to standard
output.
.
.
.TP
.B -v\~\fR|\fB\~--version
Print version information to standard output.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "Filespec Options"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
So far, there are only
.I filespec
and
.I breaking
options.
.
.
.P
.I filespec
arguments are file names or the minus sign
.B \-
for standard input.
.
As usual, the argument
.B \-\-
can be used in order to let all following arguments mean file names,
even if the names begin with a minus character
.BR \- .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "PINYIN PARTS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.I Pinyin
parts in
.I groff files
are enclosed by two
.B .pinyin
requests with different arguments.
.
The starting request is
.RS
.EX
\e.pinyin start
.EE
.RE
or
.RS
.EX
\e.pinyin begin
.EE
.RE
and the ending request is
.RS
.EX
\e.pinyin stop
.EE
.RE
or
.RS
.EX
\e.pinyin end
.EE
.RE
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "PINYIN DETAILS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.I Pinyin
is used for writing the Chinese language in a European-like
(romanization) way.
.
The Chinese language consists of more than 400 syllables, each with
one of 5 different tones.
.
In
.IR Pinyin ,
such toned syllables can be appended to word-like connections.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "Syllables"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The Chinese language is based on about 411 defined
.IR syllables ,
see
.UR http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pinyin_table
.UE .
.
.
.P
In
.IR Pinyin ,
each syllable consists of 1 to 6 European-like letters, the normal
ASCII characters in upper and lower case, the only unusual characters
are the
.BR "U dieresis " ( umlaut )
in both cases, i.e.
.BR [a-zA-ZüÜ] .
.
.
.P
In the
.B groff gpinyin
input,
all ASCII letters are written as usual.
.
But the
.BR u / U
.B dieresis
can be written as either as
.B \e[\[aq]u] or
.B ue
in lower case or
.BR \e[\[aq]U] ,
.BR Ue ,
.B UE
in upper case.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "Tones"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Each syllable has exactly one of 5 defined
.IR tones .
.
The 5th tone is not written at all, but each tone 1 to 4 is written
as an accent above a defined vowel within the syllable.
.
.
.P
In the source file, these tones are written by adding a number 0 to 5
after the syllable name.
.
.
.P
In each writing, the tone numbers 1 to 4 are transformed into accents
above vowels.
.
.
.P
The 1st tone is the horizontal macron
.BR \e[a\-]
.B \[a-] ,
similar to a minus or sub character, but on top of the vowel.
.
In each source file, write the 1st tone as
.IB "syllable" 1\fR.
.
.
.P
The 2nd tone is the accute accent
.B \e[aa]
.BR \[aa] .
.
In each source file, write the 2nd tone as
.IB "syllable" 2\fR.
.
.
.P
The 3rd tone is the caron sign,
.BR \e[ah]
.B \[ah] ,
which looks a bit like a small
.B v
above the vowel.
.
In each source file, write the 3rd tone as
.IB "syllable" 3\fR.
.
.
.P
The 4th tone is the grave accent
.B \e[ga]
.BR \[ga] .
.
In each source file, write the 4th tone as
.IB "syllable" 4\fR.
.
.
.P
The 5th tone is the no-tone.
.
The numbers 0 and 5 can be used for the
.BR ( no-tone ).
.
The
.B no-tone
number can be omitted, when the syllable is the end of some word.
.
But within a word of syllables, one of the
.B no-tone
numbers 0 or 5 must be written.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP
.BR \%groff (@MAN1EXT@)
.TQ
.BR \%grog (@MAN1EXT@)
.TQ
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@)
Man\-pages with section
.B 1
related to
.IR groff .
.
They can be called with either
.RS
.RS
.EX
.BI man " name"
.BI groffer "name"
.EE
.RE
.RE
.
.
.TP
.BR \%groff (@MAN7EXT@)
.TQ
.BR \%groff_char (@MAN7EXT@)
Man\-pages with section
.B 7
related to
.IR groff .
.
They can be called with either
.RS
.RS
.EX
.BI "man 7" " name"
.BI "groffer 7" " name"
.EE
.RE
.RE
.
.
.P
Internet documents related to
.I pinyin
are
.RS
.br
.UR http://\:en.wikipedia.org/\:wiki/\:Pinyin
.I Wikipedia pinyin
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\:en.wikipedia.org/\:wiki/\:Pinyin_table
.I Pinyin Table
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\;www.sino.uni-heidelberg.de/\:course_resources/\:s02/\:\
py-vowels.htm
.I Unicode vowels for Pinyin 
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\:www.foolsworkshop.com/\:ptou/\:index.html
.IR pinyin to Unicode
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\:www.mandarintools.com/
.I Online Chinese Tools
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\:www.pinyin.info/\:index.html
.I Main pinyin website
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\:www.pinyin.info/\:rules/\:where.html
.I Where do the tone marks go?
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\:git.savannah.gnu.org/\:gitweb/\:\
?p=cjk.git;a=blob_plain;f=doc/\:pinyin.txt;hb=HEAD
.I Pinyin for TeX 1
.UE ,
.
.br
.UR http://\:git.savannah.gnu.org/\:gitweb/\:\
?p=cjk.git;a=blob_plain;f=texinput/p\:inyin.sty;hb=HEAD
.I Pinyin for TeX 2
.UE .
.
.RE
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "COPYING"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.co
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "AUTHORS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.au
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Emacs settings
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" coding: latin-1
.\" End:
