.ig
Copyright (C) 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.TH PIC2GRAPH @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.IX pic2graph
.SH NAME
pic2graph \- convert a PIC diagram into a cropped image
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nr a \n(.j
.ad l
.nr i \n(.i
.in +\w'\fBpic2graph 'u
.ti \niu
.B pic2graph
.de OP
.ie \\n(.$-1 .RI "[\ \fB\%\\$1\fP\ " "\\$2" "\ ]"
.el .RB "[\ " "\\$1" "\ ]"
..
.ds b \fR|\fP
.
.OP \-unsafe
.OP \-resolution "M \*b MxN"
.OP \-format \
"ddif \*b fiasco \*b fits \*b plainpnm \*b png \*b rast \*b rle \
\*b sgi \*b sir \*b tiff \*b tiffcmyk \*b xwd"
.OP \-eqn delim
.
.ad \na
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads a PIC program as input; produces an image file (by default in
Portable Network Graphics format) suitable for the Web as output.
Also translates
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
constructs, so it can be used for generating images of mathematical
formulae.
.P
PIC is a rather expressive graphics minilanguage suitable for
producing box-and-arrow diagrams of the kind frequently used in
technical papers and textbooks.  The language is sufficiently flexible
to be quite useful for state charts, Petri-net diagrams, flow charts,
simple circuit schematics, jumper layouts, and other kinds of
illustration involving repetitive uses of simple geometric forms and
splines.  Because PIC descriptions are procedural and object-based,
they are both compact and easy to modify.
.P
The PIC language is fully documented in "\fIMaking Pictures With GNU
PIC\fP", a document which is part of the
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@)
distribution.
.P
Your input PIC code should \fInot\fR be wrapped with the .PS and .PE macros
that normally guard it within 
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@) 
macros.  The output image will be a black-on-white graphic clipped to the
smallest possible bounding box that contains all the black pixels.
.P
This program uses 
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR gs (1),
and the PNM graphics tools.
These programs must be installed on your system and accessible on your
$PATH for \fBpic2graph\fR to work.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -unsafe
Run 
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@)
in the `unsafe' mode enabling the PIC macro
.B sh
to execute arbitrary commands.  The default is to forbid this.
.TP
.BI -resolution\  MxN
Specify the pixels-per-inch resolution of the image as
.I MxN
(two numerals for horizontal and vertical dot pitch separated by an `x';
a single numeral is interpreted as a constant dot pitch for both axes).
Increasing this will increase the image's pixel size, and make fonts
render better.
.TP
.BI -format\  fmt
Specify an output format; the default is PNG (Portable Network Graphics).
Any format for which there is a PNM converter is supported.
.TP
.BI -eqn\  delim
Change the fencepost characters that delimit 
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
directives (
.B $
and
.BR $ ,
by default).  This option requires an argument, but an empty string is
accepted as a directive to disable
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
processing.
.PP
Command-line switches and arguments not listed above are passed to
the format converter selected by the format option (which is
.BR pnmtopng (1)
by default).
.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR gs (1),
.BR pnmcrop (1),
.BR pnmtopng (5)
.
.
.SH AUTHORS
Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>, based on a recipe by W. Richard Stevens.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
