.TH roff2@ROFF2MODE@ @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
roff2@ROFF2MODE@ \- transform roff code into @ROFF2MODE@ mode
.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\" The .SH was moved to this place in order to appease `apropos'.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Legalize
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.ig
roff2@ROFF2MODE@.1 - man page for roff2@ROFF2MODE@ (section 1).

Source file position:  <groff_source_top>/contrib/groffer/roff2.man
Installed position:    $prefix/share/man/man1/roff2@ROFF2MODE@.1

Last update: 8 Nov 2006
..
.de author
This file was written by
.MTO "" "Bernd Warken" .
..
.de copyleft
Copyright (C) 2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.
.P
This file is part of
.IR \%groffer ,
which is part of
.IR \%groff ,
a free software project.
.
You can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the
.nh
.B GNU General Public License
.hy
as published by the
.nh
.BR "Free Software Foundation" ,
.hy
either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.
.
.P
You should have received a copy of the \f[CR]GNU General Public
License\f[] along with
.IR groff ,
see the files \%\f[CB]COPYING\f[] and \%\f[CB]LICENSE\f[] in the top
directory of the
.I groff
source package.
.
Or read the
.I man\~page
.BR gpl (1).
You can also write to the
.nh
.B Free Software Foundation, 51 Franklin St - Fifth Floor, Boston,
.BR "MA 02110-1301, USA" .
.hy
..
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Setup
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.mso www.tmac
.
.if n \{\
.  mso tty-char.tmac
.  ftr CR R
.  ftr CI I
.  ftr CB B
.\}
.
.if '\*[.T]'dvi' \{\
.  ftr CB CW
.\}
.
.ds Ellipsis "\&.\|.\|.\""
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Macro definitions
.
.\" Ignore all arguments like a comment, even after a .eo call.
.de c
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c .File_name  (<path_name>)
.c
.c Display a file or directory name in CB font.
.c
.de File_name
.  Header_CB \\$@
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c .Header_CB  (<path_name>)
.c
.c Display a line in CB font, for example after .TP
.c
.de Header_CB
.  nh
.  Text \f[CB]\\$1\f[]\\$2
.  hy
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c static register for inter-macro communication in `.Synopsis'*
.nr roff2:Synopsis.level 0
.
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c .Synopsis  ()
.c
.c Begin a synopsis section, to be ended by a ./Synopsis macro.
.c
.de Synopsis
.  if (\\n[roff2:Synopsis.level] > 0) \
.    Error .\\$0: previous .Synopsis was not closed by ./Synopsis.
.  nh
.  ds @1 \\$1\"
.  nr @old_indent \\n(.i
.  ad l
.  in +\w'\fB\\*[@1]\0'u
.  ti \\n[@old_indent]u
.  B \\*[@1]\0\c
.  rr @old_indent
.  rm @1
.  nr roff2:Synopsis.level +1\"        marker for ./Synopsis
..
.c  --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c ./Synopsis  ()
.c
.c Close a synopsis section opened by the previous .Synopsis macro.
.c
.de /Synopsis
.  if (\\n[roff2:Synopsis.level] <= 0) \
.    Error .\\$0: no previous call of .Synopsis
.  br
.  ad
.  in
.  hy
.  nr roff2:Synopsis.level -1
..
.c  --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c .Text  (<text>...)
.c
.c Treat the arguments as text, no matter how they look.
.c
.de Text
.  if (\\n[.$] == 0) \
.    return
.  nh
.  nop \)\\$*\)
.  hy
..
.
.\" End of macro definitions
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.ad l
.Synopsis roff2@ROFF2MODE@
.RI [ groffer_option \*[Ellipsis]]
[\f[CB]\-\-\fP]
.RI [ \%filespec \*[Ellipsis]]
./Synopsis
.
.Synopsis roff2@ROFF2MODE@
\f[CB]\-h\fP\f[CR]|\fP\f[CB]\-\-help\fP
./Synopsis
.
.Synopsis roff2@ROFF2MODE@
\f[CB]\-v\fP\f[CR]|\fP\f[CB]\-\-version\fP
./Synopsis
.
.
.P
The options
.B \-v
and
.B \%\-\-version
print a version information of the program to standard output and stop
the program instantly.
.
The options
.B \-h
and
.B \%\-\-help
print a usage information of the program to standard output and stop
the program instantly.
.
.
.P
All other options are assumed to be
.B \%groffer
options.
.
They are internally passed to
.BR \%groffer .
They override the behavior of the program.
.
The options are optional, they can be omitted.
.
.
.P
The
.I \%filespec
arguments correspond to the
.I \%filespec
arguments of
.BR \%groffer .
So they are either the names of existing, readable files or
.B \-
for standard input or the name of a man page or a
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@)
man page search pattern.
.
If no
.I \%filespec
is specified standard input is assumed automatically.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.B \%roff2@ROFF2MODE@
transforms
.I roff
code into
.ie '@ROFF2MODE@'x' \{\
.I X
mode corresponding to the
.I groff
devices
.BR X *;
this mode is suitable for
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
.\}
.el \fI\%@ROFF2MODE@\fP mode.
.
Print the result to standard output.
.
.
.P
There are more of these programs for generating other formats of
.I \%roff
input.
.
.TP
.BR \%roff2dvi (@MAN1EXT@)
is for
.I dvi
mode.
.
.TP
.BR \%roff2html (@MAN1EXT@)
generates
.I html
output.
.
.TP
.BR \%roff2pdf (@MAN1EXT@)
outputs
.I pdf
mode.
.
.TP
.BR \%roff2ps (@MAN1EXT@)
prints
.I \%PostScript
format to standard output.
.TP
.BR \%roff2text (@MAN1EXT@)
generates text output in the
.B groff
device
.IR latin1 .
.
.TP
.BR \%roff2x (@MAN1EXT@)
prints the output in the
.B groff
device
.B X
that is suitable for programs like
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@)
or
.BR \%xditview (1).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.BR \%groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%roff2dvi (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%roff2html (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%roff2pdf (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%roff2ps (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%roff2text (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%roff2x (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "AUTHOR"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.author
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "COPYING"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.copyleft
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Emacs settings
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
