.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH GROPDF @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
gropdf \- PDF driver for groff
.
.
.do nr groff_C \n[.C]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" license
.de co
Copyright \[co] 2011-2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.  ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.  el .TP "\\$1"
..
.
.de FT
.  if '\\*(.T'ps' .ft \\$1
.  if '\\*(.T'pdf' .ft \\$1
..
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.SY gropdf
.OP \-delvs
.OP \-F dir
\#.OP \-I dir
.OP \-p papersize
\#.OP \-w n
.OP \-y foundry
.OP \-u [cmapfile]
.RI [ files
.IR .\|.\|. ]
.YS
.
.
.LP
It is possible to have whitespace between a command line option and its
parameter.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.B gropdf
translates the output of GNU
.B troff
to PDF.
.
Normally
.B gropdf
should be invoked by using the groff command
with a
.B \-Tpdf
option.
.
If no files are given,
.B gropdf
reads the standard input.
.
A filename of
.B \-
also causes
.B gropdf
to read the standard input.
.
PDF output is written to the standard output.
.
When
.B gropdf
is run by
.B groff
options can be passed to
.B gropdf
using
.BR groff \[aq]s
.B \-P
option.
.
.
.LP
See section
.B FONT INSTALLATION
below for a guide how to install fonts for
.BR gropdf .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP
.B \-d
Include debug information as comments within the PDF.
.
Also produces an uncompressed PDF.
.
.TP
.B \-e
Force all fonts to be embedded in the PDF.
.
.TP
.BI \-F dir
Prepend directory
.IB dir /dev name
to the search path for font, and device description files;
.I name
is the name of the device, usually
.BR pdf .
.
.\" .TP
.\" .BI \-I dir
.\" This option may be used to add a directory to the search path for
.\" files on the command line and files named in
.\" .B \[rs]X'ps: import'
.\" and
.\" .B \[rs]X'ps: file'
.\" escapes.
.\" .
.\" The search path is initialized with the current directory.
.\" .
.\" This option may be specified more than once; the directories are then
.\" searched in the order specified (but before the current directory).
.\" .
.\" If you want to make the current directory be read before other directories,
.\" add
.\" .B \-I.\&
.\" at the appropriate place.
.\" .
.\" .IP
.\" No directory search is performed for files with an absolute file name.
.\" .
.\" .TP
.
.TP
.B \-l
Print the document in landscape format.
.
.TP
.BI \-p paper-size
Set physical dimension of output medium.
.
This overrides the
.BR papersize ,
.BR paperlength ,
and
.B paperwidth
commands in the
.B DESC
file; it accepts the same arguments as the
.B papersize
command.
.
See
.B groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)
for details.
.
.\" .TP
.\" .BI \-w n
.\" Lines should be drawn using a thickness of
.\" .IR n \~\c
.\" thousandths of an em.
.\" .
.\" If this option is not given, the line thickness defaults to 0.04\~em.
.\" .
.
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version number.
.
.TP
.BI \-y foundry
Set the foundry to use for selecting fonts of the same name.
.
.TP
.B \-e
Forces
.B gropdf
to embed ALL fonts (even the 14 base PDF fonts).
.
.TP
.B \-s
Append a comment line to end of PDF showing statistics,
i.e.\& number of pages in document.
.
Ghostscript\[aq]s
.B ps2pdf
complains about this line if it is included, but works anyway.
.
.TP
.B \-u
.TQ
.BI \-u cmapfilename
.B Gropdf
normally includes a ToUnicode CMap with any font created using
.B text.enc
as the encoding file,
this makes it easier to search for words which contain ligatures.
.
You can include your own CMap by specifying a
.I cmapfilename
or have no CMap at all by omitting the argument.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH USAGE
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The input to
.B gropdf
must be in the format output by
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@).
.
This is described in
.BR groff_out (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.LP
In addition, the device and font description files for the device used
must meet certain requirements:
.
The resolution must be an integer multiple of\~72 times the
.BR sizescale .
.
The
.B pdf
device uses a resolution of 72000 and a sizescale of 1000.
.
.
.LP
The device description file must contain a valid paper size; see
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)
for more information.
.
.B gropdf
uses the same Type\~1 Adobe postscript fonts as the
.B grops
device driver.
.
Although the PDF Standard allows the use of other font types (like
TrueType) this implementation only accepts the Type\~1 postscript
font.
.
Fewer Type\~1 fonts are supported natively in PDF documents than the
standard 35 fonts supported by
.B grops
and all postscript printers, but all the fonts are available since any
which aren\[aq]t supported natively are automatically embedded in the
PDF.
.
.
.LP
.B gropdf
supports the concept of foundries, that is different versions of basically
the same font.
.
During install a
.B Foundry
file controls where fonts are found and builds
.B groff
fonts from the files it discovers on your system.
.
.
.LP
Each font description file must contain a command
.
.IP
.BI internalname\  psname
.
.LP
which says that the PostScript name of the font is
.IR psname .
.
Lines starting with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored.
.
The code for each character given in the font file must correspond
to the code in the default encoding for the font.
.
This code can be used with the
.B \[rs]N
escape sequence in
.B troff
to select the character,
even if the character does not have a groff name.
.
Every character in the font file must exist in the PostScript font, and
the widths given in the font file must match the widths used
in the PostScript font.
.
.
.LP
Note that
.B gropdf
is currently only able to display the first 256 glyphs in any font.
This restriction will be lifted in a later version.
.
.
.\" .LP
.\" Note that
.\" .B grops
.\" is able to display all glyphs in a PostScript font, not only 256.
.\" .I enc_file
.\" (or the default encoding if no encoding file specified) just defines the
.\" order of glyphs for the first 256 characters; all other glyphs are
.\" accessed with additional encoding vectors which
.\" .B grops
.\" produces on the fly.
.
.
.LP
.B gropdf
can automatically include the downloadable fonts necessary
to print the document.
.
Fonts may be in PFA or PFB format.
.LP
.
Any downloadable fonts which should, when required, be included by
.B gropdf
must be listed in the file
.BR @FONTDIR@/devpdf/download ;
this should consist of lines of the form
.
.IP
.I
foundry font filename
.
.LP
where
.I foundry
is the foundry name or blank for the default foundry.
.
.I font
is the PostScript name of the font,
and
.I filename
is the name of the file containing the font;
lines beginning with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored;
fields must be separated by tabs
(spaces are
.B not
allowed);
.I filename
is searched for using the same mechanism that is used
for groff font metric files.
.
The
.B download
file itself is also searched for using this mechanism;
currently, only the first found file in the font path is used.
.
Foundry names are usually a single character (such as \[oq]U\[cq] for
the URW Foundry) or blank for the default foundry.
.
This default uses the same fonts as
.B ghostscript
uses when it embeds fonts in a PDF file.
.
.
.LP
In the default setup there are styles called
.BR R ,
.BR I ,
.BR B ,
and
.B BI
mounted at font positions 1 to\~4.
.
The fonts are grouped into families
.BR A ,
.BR BM ,
.BR C ,
.BR H ,
.BR HN ,
.BR N ,
.BR P ,
and\~\c
.B T
having members in each of these styles:
.
.RS
.TP
.B AR
.FT AR
AvantGarde-Book
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AI
.FT AI
AvantGarde-BookOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AB
.FT AB
AvantGarde-Demi
.FT
.
.TQ
.B ABI
.FT ABI
AvantGarde-DemiOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMR
.FT BMR
Bookman-Light
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMI
.FT BMI
Bookman-LightItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMB
.FT BMB
Bookman-Demi
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMBI
.FT BMBI
Bookman-DemiItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CR
.FT CR
Courier
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CI
.FT CI
Courier-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CB
.FT CB
Courier-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CBI
.FT CBI
Courier-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HR
.FT HR
Helvetica
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HI
.FT HI
Helvetica-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HB
.FT HB
Helvetica-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HBI
.FT HBI
Helvetica-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNR
.FT HNR
Helvetica-Narrow
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNI
.FT HNI
Helvetica-Narrow-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNB
.FT HNB
Helvetica-Narrow-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNBI
.FT HNBI
Helvetica-Narrow-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NR
.FT NR
NewCenturySchlbk-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NI
.FT NI
NewCenturySchlbk-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NB
.FT NB
NewCenturySchlbk-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NBI
.FT NBI
NewCenturySchlbk-BoldItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PR
.FT PR
Palatino-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PI
.FT PI
Palatino-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PB
.FT PB
Palatino-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PBI
.FT PBI
Palatino-BoldItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TR
.FT TR
Times-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TI
.FT TI
Times-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TB
.FT TB
Times-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TBI
.FT TBI
Times-BoldItalic
.FT
.RE
.
.
.LP
There is also the following font which is not a member of a family:
.
.RS
.TP
.B ZCMI
.FT ZCMI
ZapfChancery-MediumItalic
.FT
.RE
.
.
.LP
There are also some special fonts called
.B S
for the PS Symbol font.
.
The lower case greek characters are automatically slanted (to match
the SymbolSlanted font (SS) available to postscript).
.
Zapf Dingbats is available as
.BR ZD ,
the "hand pointing left" glyph (\[rs][lh]) is available since it has
been defined using the \[rs]X'pdf: xrev' extension which reverses the
direction of letters within words.
.
.
.LP
The default color for
.B \[rs]m
and
.B \[rs]M
is black; for colors defined in the \[oq]rgb\[cq] color space
.B setrgbcolor
is used, for \[oq]cmy\[cq] and \[oq]cmyk\[cq]
.BR setcmykcolor ,
and for \[oq]gray\[cq]
.BR setgray .
.
Note that
.B setcmykcolor
is a PostScript LanguageLevel\~2 command and thus not available on
some older printers.
.
.
.LP
.B gropdf
understands some of the X\~commands produced using the
.B \[rs]X
escape sequences supported by
.B grops.
Specifically, the following is supported.
.
.TP
.B "\[rs]X'ps: invis'"
Suppress output.
.
.TP
.B "\[rs]X'ps: endinvis'"
Stop suppressing output.
.
.TP
.B "\[rs]X'ps: exec gsave currentpoint 2 copy translate \fIn\fP rotate neg exch neg exch translate'"
where
.I n
is the angle of rotation.
This is to support the
.I align
command in
.BR gpic .
.
.TP
.B "\[rs]X'ps: exec grestore'"
Again used by
.B gpic
to restore after rotation.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X'ps: exec " "n " "setlinejoin'"
where
.I n
can be one of the following values.
.IP
0 = Miter join
.br
1 = Round join
.br
2 = Bevel join
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X'ps: exec " "n " "setlinecap'"
where
.I n
can be one of the following values.
.IP
0 = Butt cap
.br
1 = Round cap, and
.br
2 = Projecting square cap
.
.
.LP
.TP
.B "\[rs]X'ps: ... pdfmark'"
All the
.I pdfmark
macros installed by using
.I \-m pdfmark
or
.I \-m mspdf
(see documentation in \[oq]pdfmark.pdf\[cq]).
.
A subset of these macros are installed automatically when you use
.B \-Tpdf
so you should not need to use \[oq]\-m pdfmark\[cq] for using most of
the PDF functionality.
.
.
.LP
All other
.B ps:
tags are silently ignored.
.
.
.LP
One
.B \[rs]X
special used by the DVI driver is also recognised:
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]X'papersize= paper-size '
where the
.I paper-size
parameter is the same as the
.B papersize
command.
.
See
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)
for details.
.
This means that you can alter the page size at will within the PDF file
being created by
.BR gropdf .
.
If you do want to change the paper size, it must be done before you start
creating the page.
.
.LP
In addition,
.B gropdf
supports its own suite of
.B pdf:
tags.
.
The following tags are supported:
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X'pdf: pdfpic " "file alignment width height line-length" '
Place an image of the specified
.I width
containing the PDF drawing from file
.I file
of desired
.I width
and
.I height
(if
.I height
is missing or zero then it is scaled proportionally).
.
If
.I alignment
is
.B \-L
the drawing is left aligned.
.
If it is
.B \-C
or
.B \-R
a
.I linelength
greater than the width of the drawing is required as well.
.
If
.I width
is specified as zero then the width is scaled in proportion to the height.
.
.\" .IP
.\" See
.\" .BR groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@)
.\" for a description of the
.\" .B PSPIC
.\" macro which provides a convenient high-level interface for inclusion of
.\" PostScript graphics.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X'pdf: xrev'
This toggles a flag which reverses the direction of printing
.IR "letter by letter" ,
i.e., each separate letter is reversed, not the entire word.
.
This is useful for reversing the direction of glyphs in the Dingbats font.
.
To return to normal printing repeat the command again.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X'pdf: markstart " "/ANN definition" '
The macros which support PDF Bookmarks use this call internally to
start the definition of bookmark hotspot (user will have called
\[oq].pdfhref\~L\[cq] with the text which will become the \[oq]hot
spot\[cq] region).
.
Normally this is never used except from within the pdfmark macros.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X'pdf: markend'
The macros which support PDF Bookmarks use this call internally to
stop the definition of bookmark hotspot (user will have called
\[oq].pdfhref\~L\[cq] with the text which will become the \[oq]hot
spot\[cq] region).
.
Normally this is never used except from within the pdfmark macros.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X'pdf: marksuspend'
.TQ
.B \[rs]X'pdf: markrestart'
If you are using page traps to produce headings, footings, etc., you
need to use these in case a \[oq]hot spot\[cq] crosses a page
boundary, otherwise any text output by the heading or footing macro
will be marked as part of the \[oq]hot spot\[cq].
.
To stop this happening just place \[oq].pdfmarksuspend\[cq] and
\[oq].pdfmarkrestart\[cq] at the start and end of the page trap macro,
respectively.
.
(These are just convenience macros which emit the \[rs]X code.
.
These macros must only be used within page traps.)
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Importing graphics
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.B gropdf
only supports importing other PDF files as graphics.
.
But that PDF file may contain any of the graphic formats supported by
the PDF standard (such as JPEG, PNG, GIF, etc.).
.
So any application which outputs PDF can be used as an embedded file
in
.BR gropdf .
.
The PDF file you wish to insert must be a single page and the drawing
must just fit inside the media size of the PDF file.
.
So, in
.BR inkscape (1)
or
.BR gimp (1)
(for example) make sure the canvas size just fits the image.
.
.
.LP
The PDF parser used in
.B gropdf
has not been rigorously tested with all possible applications which
produce PDFs.
.
If you find a single page PDF which fails to import properly, it is
worth running it through the
.
.BR pdftk (1)
program by issuing the command:
.
.
.RS
.LP
.B pdftk
.I oldfile.pdf
.B output
.I newfile.pdf
.RE
.
.
.LP
You may find that
.I newfile.pdf
will now load successfully.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS TrueType and other font formats
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.B gropdf
does not support any other fonts except Adobe Type 1 (PFA or PFB).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FONT INSTALLATION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
This section gives a summary of the above explanations; it can serve
as a step-by-step font installation guide for
.BR gropdf .
.
.ds BU \[bu]\ \ \"
.de LI
.IP "" 4
\h'-\w'\*[BU]'u'\*[BU]\c
..
.LI
Convert your font to something groff understands.
.
This is either a PostScript Type\~1 font in either PFA or PFB,
together with an AFM file.
.
.IP
The very first line in a PFA/PFB file contains this:
.
.RS
.IP
.B %!PS-AdobeFont-1.0:
.RE
.
.IP
A PFB file has this also in the first line, but the string is
preceded with some binary bytes.
.
.LI
Convert the AFM file to a groff font description file with the
.BR \%afmtodit (@MAN1EXT@)
program.
.
An example call is
.
.RS
.IP
afmtodit Foo-Bar-Bold.afm map/textmap FBB
.RE
.
.IP
which converts the metric file \[oq]Foo-Bar-Bold.afm\[cq] to the groff
font \[oq]FBB\[cq].
.
If you have a font family which comes with normal, bold, italic, and
bold italic faces, it is recommended to use the letters
.BR R ,
.BR B ,
.BR I ,
and
.BR BI ,
respectively, as postfixes in the groff font names to make groff\[aq]s
\[oq].fam\[cq] request work.
.
An example is groff\[aq]s built-in Times-Roman font: The font family
name is
.BR T ,
and the groff font names are
.BR TR ,
.BR TB ,
.BR TI ,
and
.BR TBI .
.
.LI
Install both the groff font description files and the fonts in a
\[oq]devpdf\[cq] subdirectory of the font path which groff finds.
.
See the
.B ENVIRONMENT
section in the
.BR troff (@MAN1EXT@)
man page which lists the actual value of the font path.
.
Note that groff doesn\[aq]t use the AFM files (but it is a good idea to
store them anyway).
.
.LI
Register all fonts which must be downloaded to the printer in the
\[oq]devpdf/download\[cq] file.
.
Only the first occurrence of this file in the font path is read.
.
This means that you should copy the default \[oq]download\[cq] file to
the first directory in your font path and add your fonts there.
.
To continue the above example we assume that the PS font name for
Foo-Bar-Bold.pfa is \[oq]XY-Foo-Bar-Bold\[cq] (the PS font name is
stored in the
.B internalname
field in the \[oq]FBB\[cq] file) and belongs to foundry \[oq]F\[cq]
thus the following line should be added to \[oq]download\[cq]:
.
.RS
.IP
.B F XY-Foo-Bar-Bold Foo-Bar-Bold.pfa
.
.
.LP
Use a tab character to separate the fields, and the \[oq]foundry\[cq]
field should be null for the default foundry.
.RE
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP
.SM
.B GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to search for the
.BI dev name
directory in addition to the default ones.
.
If, in the \[oq]download\[cq] file, the
font file has been specified with a full path, no directories are searched.
.
See
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.BR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)
for more details.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FILES
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.Tp \w'\fB@FONTDIR@/devpdf/download'u+2n
.B @FONTDIR@/devpdf/DESC
Device description file.
.
.TP
.BI @FONTDIR@/devpdf/ F
Font description file for font\~\c
.IR F .
.
.TP
.BI @FONTDIR@/devpdf/ U-F
Font description file for font\~\c
.I F
(using foundry\~\c
.I U
rather than the default foundry).
.
.TP
.B @FONTDIR@/devpdf/download
List of downloadable fonts.
.
.TP
.B @FONTDIR@/devpdf/Foundry
A Perl script used during install to locate suitable fonts.
.
.TP
.B @FONTDIR@/devpdf/enc/text.enc
Encoding used for text fonts.
.
.TP
.B @MACRODIR@/pdf.tmac
Macros for use with
.BR gropdf ;
automatically loaded by
.BR troffrc .
.
.\" .TP
.\" .B @MACRODIR@/pspic.tmac
.\" Definition of
.\" .B PSPIC
.\" macro,
.\" automatically loaded by
.\" .BR ps.tmac .
.\" .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.ad l
.
.BR \%afmtodit (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR grops (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR grops (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%pfbtops (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%groff_out (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR \%groff_char (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@)
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH LICENSE
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.co
.
.
.cp \n[groff_C]
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
