.ig
Copyright (C) 2012
  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
written by Deri James <deri@chuzzlewit.demon.co.uk>
and Peter Schaffter <peter@schaffter.ca)

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.
.TH PDFMOM @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
pdfmom \- Produce PDF documents using the mom macro set
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY pdfmom
.OP \-Tps "\fR[pdfroff options]"
[groff options]
.I files .\|.\|.
.YS
.
.SY pdfmom
.OP \-Tpdf
[groff options]
.I files .\|.\|.
.YS
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
.B pdfmom
is a wrapper around
.B groff
that facilitates the production of PDF documents from files
formatted with the mom macros.
.
.P
.B pdfmom
prints to stdout, so output must be redirected to a destination
file.  The size of the final PDF can be reduced by piping the output
through
.BR ps2pdf .
.
.P
If called with the
.B \-Tpdf
option (which is the default),
.B pdfmom
processes files using groff's native PDF driver,
.BR gropdf .
If
.B \-Tps
is given, processing is passed over to
.BR pdfroff ,
which uses
.BR groff 's
PostScript driver.
In either case, multiple runs of the source file are peformed in
order to satisfy any forward references in the document.
.
.P
.B pdfmom
accepts all the same options as
.BR groff .
If
.B \-Tps
is given, the options associated with
.B pdfroff
are accepted as well.
Please note that when
.B pdfmom
calls
.BR pdfroff ,
the
.
.P
.RS
.B -mpdfmark -mom --no-toc
.RE
.
.P
options are implied and should not be given on the
command line.
Equally, it is not necessary to supply the
.B -mom
or
.B "-m\~mom"
options when
.B \-Tps
is absent.
.
.P
PDF integration with the
.B mom
macros is discussed in full in the PDF manual,
.IR "Producing PDFs with groff and mom" .
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
.B pdfmom
sometimes issues warnings of the type
.
.P
.RS 2
\&.\|.\|.:
.B can't transparently output node at top level
.RE
.
.P
This is more of an annoyance than a bug, and may safely be ignored.
.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR pdfroff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR ps2pdf (@MAN1EXT@)
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
